---

title: Background
permalink: /background/
order: 2
---

<span class='spoken btnOnly'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='fχθʌɣnzi ivəɮ ɻxiʔəɻ vɣʌv suɸuv fχθʌɣiɮʃiʔuβ vɣʌv iθɣðzxi ʌɮðɻiʃ fχθʌɣ jij'>🔈</button>  </span> <strong>fhtog̣ṇzị ivoḷ rxị'oṛ vgoṿ sup̣uṿ fhtog̣ịl5ị'uḅ vgoṿ itg̣ḍzxị oldri5̣ fhtog̣ yiỵ</strong>

`dead-NEG DET.DIST abide-REL can eternity-ADV.DER sleep-FFUT-CONJ.and can aeon-PL-TEMP strange death EMPH`

/fχθʌɣnzi ivəɮ ɻxiʔəɻ vɣʌv suɸuv fχθʌɣiɮʃiʔuβ vɣʌv iθɣðzxi ʌɮðɻiʃ fχθʌɣ jij/

_That is not dead which can eternal lie, and with strange aeons even death may die._

## A pidgin for Lovecraftian cultists

A [pidgin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pidgin) is a language that evolves among two populations of people that cannot otherwise communicate with each other. **Lugso is a pidgin that emerged among cultists who regularly communicate with the Elder Gods.**

It is NOT a language-between-languages, however. Lugso is a language-between-worlds, because the Elder Gods not only do not speak in human tongues, but they do not _think_ in human concepts. Lugso represents not only eldritch _speech_, but eldritch _thought_ - or, as near as humans can manage, without giving themselves an internal hemorrhage. It is the mediation between human thought and the least sophisticated conceits of the unspeakable Old Ones. **It is a "meta-pidgin", connecting our fragile mental models with the biting winds of their reality.**

## Dedication

Lugso is dedicated to the man and woman showed me that not only is it possible to experience the indescribable truths undergirding all of creation (as Lovecraft feared that we could), but also that it is good and even beautiful to do so. It is dedicated to the two human beings who rescued me from a futile search for comprehension of the incomprehensible (as Lovecraft dared never imagine), and taught me instead to seek unity with Unity, and being united to Being. To the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the Immaculate Heart of Mary, on October 15th 2022 I dedicate and consecrate this language and all of its good effects, for eternity.

I also dedicate it to my wife, who I can only pray forgives me for spending so much time on this silly little thing.