---

title: Syntax
permalink: /syntax/
order: 3
---
## Lesson Vocab

English|Part of Speech|IPA|Lugso|Comments
|-|-|-|-
ACC|N suffix|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='iɻ'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>iɻ</span> </span>|ir|accusative case - to N, towards location
consume|VB|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='χuf'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>χuf</span> </span>|huf|
i|1SG|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='nʌ'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>nʌ</span> </span>|no|
you|2SG|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='ðʌ'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>ðʌ</span> </span>|do|
beast|N|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='θɮu'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>θɮu</span> </span>|tlu|
fly|VB|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='sʌʒʃ'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>sʌʒʃ</span> </span>|so35|travel through gas
swim|VB|<span class='spoken'> <button class='speak' type='button' data-ipa='vux'>🔈</button> <span class='ipa'>vux</span> </span>|vux|travel through liqud

## Word Order (Part I)

In English, we say, "I fly". In Lugso, the cultist says, "fly I". Verb comes before subject.

**so35 no**

`fly 1SG`

---

**vux tlu**

`swim beast`

_The/A beast swims._

## Word Order (Part II)

In English, we say, for example, but hopefully not too often, "You consume me." We know based on the fact that "You" comes before "consume" that it is you who are doing the consuming, and from the fact "me" comes after "consume" that it is I who am being consumed. In linguistic terms, you are the subject, consume is the verb, and I am the object. Order: S-V-O.

Lugso has word order V-O-S: a cultist says, "consume me you".

### Verb-Object-Subject

But how does he know what's the subject and what's the object? In English, we change "I" to "me", or "he" to "him" when the speaker is an object - _I_ hit **him**, but _he_ hits **me** - in Lugso, the cultist appends **-ir**, which performs the same transformation of any given noun. This is known as the _accusative case_.

### Accusative case

A noun obtains the accusative case if the verb is _being done to_ it.

**huf no'ir do**

`consume 1SG-ACC 2SG`

_You consume me._

---

A noun also obtains accusative if it is the _destination of a movement._

**so35 do'ir tlu**

`fly 2SG-ACC beast`

_The/A beast glides to you._

---

We will cover more **noun cases** in a future lesson.

## Suffix Order

Lugso leverages a great number of suffixes. The grammatical order is as follows:

### Noun suffixes

1. Root noun
2. Plural suffix
3. Case marker
4. Negation
5. Question suffix

### Verb suffixes

1. Root verb
2. Tense
3. Mood
4. Negation
5. Subordinating suffix
6. Question suffix
7. Relative or Conjunction
